docs: dependent resources (#1026)
java-operator-sdk/java-operator-sdk: docs/documentation/dependent-resources.md

---

> title: Dependent Resources Feature description: Dependent Resources Feature layout: docs permalink:

Author: Unfortunatelly formatter usually brokes this header of the file, just make sure that after format this part is reverted.

Reviewer: Ah yes, I did it several times while writing the docs but I guess I need to deactivate automatic formatting on commits in my IDE.

/docs/dependent-resources
---

# Dependent Resources

DISCLAIMER: The Dependent Resource support is relatively new and, while we strove to cover what we
anticipate will be the most common use cases, the implementation is not simple and might still
evolve. As a result, some APIs could be still a subject of change in the future. However,
non-backwards compatible changes are expected to be trivial to adapt to.

## Motivations and Goals

Most operators need to deal with secondary resources when trying to realize the desired state
described by the primary resource it is in charge of. For example, the Kubernetes-native
`Deployment` controller needs to manage `ReplicaSet` instances as part of a `Deployment`'s
reconciliation process. In this instance, `ReplicatSet` is considered a secondary resource for
the `Deployment` controller.

Controllers that deal with secondary resources typically need to perform the following steps, for
each secondary resource:

> ```mermaid

Author: I'm pretty sure Mermaid will not work with Jekyll

Reviewer: Yes but we should be able to make it work by importing the JS lib. See https://codewithhugo.com/mermaid-js-hugo-shortcode/ for example.

Author: Great, that would be awesome.

flowchart TD

A{Secondary resource exists?}
A -- Yes --> match
A -- No --> compute

compute[Compute desired state based on primary state] --> Create --> Done
match{Matches desired state as defined by primary?}
match -- Yes --> Done

> match -- No --> Update 

Reviewer: No it's not actually. In the update case, the full desired state is only computed if the matcher didn't do it as it's often possible to check if the secondary resources match without computing the full desired state.

> match -- No --> Update 

Reviewer 2: > No it's not actually. In the update case, the full desired state is only computed if the matcher didn't do it as it's often possible to check if the secondary resources match without computing the full desired state.

Yes but to do Create or Update, you need to have a desired state in both case.
If the flow shows when the creatable desired state is computed, it should show when it is computed for Update branch.

Update is slightly more complex due to Matcher computed result can optionally provide a desired state. I thought it would make the whole picture a bit too detailed for an introduction.

> match -- No --> Update 

Reviewer 3: > No it's not actually. In the update case, the full desired state is only computed if the matcher didn't do it as it's often possible to check if the secondary resources match without computing the full desired state.

Yes but to do Create or Update, you need to have a desired state in both case.
If the flow shows when the creatable desired state is computed, it should show when it is computed for Update branch.

Update is slightly more complex due to Matcher computed result can optionally provide a desired state. I thought it would make the whole picture a bit too detailed for an introduction.

> match -- No --> Update 

Reviewer: That's part of the subtleties of getting the management of dependents right… 😉 
But, indeed, it's probably too detailed for documentation purposes.

```

While these steps are not difficult in and of themselves, there are some subtleties that can lead to
bugs or sub-optimal code if not done right. As this process is pretty much similar for each
dependent resource, it makes sense for the SDK to offer some level of support to remove the
boilerplate code of these repetitive actions. It should be possible to handle common cases (such as
dealing with Kubernetes-native secondary resources) in a semi-declarative way with only a minimal
amount of code, JOSDK taking care of wiring everything accordingly.

Moreover, in order for your reconciler to get informed of events on these secondary resources, you
need to configure and create event sources and maintain them. JOSDK already makes it rather easy to

> deal with these but we felt that we could make things even simpler.

Author: ```suggestion
deal with these, but dependent resources makes it even simpler.
```

Finally, there are also opportunities for the SDK to transparently add features that are even
trickier to get right, such as immediate caching of updated or created resources (so that your
reconciler doesn't need to wait for a cluster roundtrip to continue its work) and associated event
filtering (so that something your reconciler just changed doesn't re-trigger a reconciliation, for
example).

## Design

### `DependentResource` vs. `AbstractDependentResource`

> The new `DependentResource` interface lies at the core of the design and strives to encapsulate the

Author: Would add links here to the code.

logic that is required to reconcile the state of the associated secondary resource based on the
state of the primary one. For most cases, this logic will follow the flow expressed above and JOSDK
provides a very convenient implementation of this logic in the form of the
`AbstractDependentResource` class. If your logic doesn't fit this pattern, though, you can still
provide your own `reconcile` method implementation. While the benefits of using dependent resources
are less obvious in that case, this allows you to separate the logic necessary to deal with each
secondary resource in its own class that can then be tested in isolation via unit tests. You can
also use the declarative support with your own implementations as we shall see later on.

`AbstractDependentResource` is designed so that classes extending it specify which functionality
they support by implementing trait interfaces. This design has been selected to express the fact
that not all secondary resources are completely under the control of the primary reconciler: some
dependent resources are only ever created or updated for example and we needed a way to let JOSDK

> when that is the case. We therefore provide trait interfaces: `Creator`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
know when that is the case. We therefore provide trait interfaces: `Creator`,
```

`Updater` and `Deleter` to express that the `DependentResource` implementation will provide custom
functionality to create, update and delete its associated secondary resources, respectively. If
these traits are not implemented then parts of the logic described above is never triggered: if your
implementation doesn't implement `Creator`, for example,
`AbstractDependentResource` will never try to create the associated secondary resource, even if it

> doesn't exist. It is thus possible to create read-only dependent resources that will trigger your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
doesn't exist. It is possible to not implement any of these traits and therefore create read-only dependent resources that will trigger your
```

reconciler whenever a user interacts with them but that are never modified by your reconciler
itself.

### Batteries included: convenient `DependentResource` implementations!

JOSDK also offers several other convenient implementations building on top of
`AbstractDependentResource` that you can use as starting points for your own implementations.

One such implementation is the `KubernetesDependentResource` class that makes it really easy to work

> with Kubernetes-native resources as, in this case, you usually only need to provide an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with Kubernetes-native resources. In this case, you usually only need to provide an
```
split a very long sentence

implementation for the `desired` method to tell JOSDK what the desired state of your secondary
resource should be based on the specified primary resource state. JOSDK takes care of everything
else using default implementations that you can override in case you need more precise control of
what's going on.

We also provide implementations that makes it very easy to cache
(`AbstractCachingDependentResource`) or make it easy to poll for changes in external
resources (`PollingDependentResource`, `PerResourcePollingDependentResource`). All the provided
implementations can be found in the `io/javaoperatorsdk/operator/processing/dependent` package of
the `operator-framework-core` module.

## Managed Dependent Resources

As mentioned previously, one goal of this implementation is to make it possible to
semi-declaratively create and wire dependent resources. You can annotate your reconciler with

> `@Dependent` annotations that specify which `DependentResource` implementation it depends upon and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`@Dependent` annotations that specify which `DependentResource` implementation it depends upon.
```

> JOSDK will take the appropriate steps to wire everything thing together and call your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
JOSDK will take the appropriate steps to wire everything together and call your
```
